hi friends
In this video we are going to learn how to
insert an element at a particular position in an array
So consider an array with five indices from 0 to
4 and each
index is currently holding a fruit a watermelon a strawberry
a mango a banana and a goa. Suppose
We want to add a pineapple from the basket at
the index two. To accommodate pineapple at index two first
we need to make it free
So we will shift mango banana and goa to
the right side and make index two free
So first we need a new location to add new
fruit
So we take index five now shift Goa to index
five so index four is free now then shift banana to
index four so that index three is free
Finally Shift Mango to index three so index two
becomes free so pineapple can be added to this position
That is how it is done
Now take this array of size equal to five and
we have indices from 0 to 4. Here
we want to insert an element at index two where five
is already there
The new element to be inserted is 100. First of
all we need a new location so size is incremented
by one. Now to insert 100 at index two first
we want to make it free
So you want to shift 5 78 and 30 to
the right side and make index two free.
So move 30 to index five. Now index four is free
So move 78 to this position
Now index three is free
So move five to this position. Now index two is
free
So add 100 here. Now see the code for inserting
an element at a particular position in an array. Let
pos
be
The position where we want to insert our element
The for loop will shift the elements from this particular
position to one position right making the location for
new element free. Take an example here is an array of
size equal to five
We want to insert an element at index two so
pos equal to two see how the code works
So this for loop will execute as long as the
condition i greater than pos is true When it becomes
false it exits the for loop first i equal to size
that is equal to five. First it checks
whether five is greater than two condition is true
So array of four that is 30 is moved to
index five now decrementing i becomes four checks
whether four is greater than two condition is true
So array of three that is 78
is moved to index four now decrementing i becomes
three checks
whether three is greater than two condition is true
So array of two that is five
is moved to index three
Now decrementing i becomes two checks whether two is
greater than two condition is false
So control comes out of the for loop and executes
the statement array of pos equal to element and stores
the element 100 at index two. Now let us see
the time complexities
The best case will be inserting an element at the
last position or the case
If pos is equal to size then the for
loop condition i greater than pos will be false
So we wont enter the for loop and directly execute
the statement Array of pos equal to element and insertion
will be done So the best case time complexity will
be order of one now the worst case will be
inserting an element at position one
So you need to shift all the elements to the
right and the for loop will work for n times
if you have n elements
So the worst case time complexity will be order
of n if we have n elements